April the second 2011 and Didcot railway
Center is a hive of activity as the
Great Western society launches its
latest addition to the locomotive fleet
Great Western King class number 602
three King up with the second steams for
the first time since it was scrapped by
British Railways in 1960 to 2011 marks
the 50th anniversary of the Great
Western society and the Kings launch
into traffic is just the first event
helping to celebrate this landmark
anniversary
when the preserved engines list was
published in 1961 for teenage boys were
disappointed to find that of the 71
locos on the list only 10 were Great
Western none of which were a 14 XX car
so for two Tank Engine so after writing
a letter to the Railway magazine asking
for donations to help preserve one of
these engines and later forming what
would become the Great Western society
enough money was raised and a recently
withdrawn member of the class was
preserved and this is it number one 466
was purchased from British Rail
ownership at a cost of 700 pounds
becoming the GWS first locomotive she
was delivered to a siding at totnes key
from Taunton on March the 18th 1964
being steamed for the first time on the
GWS ownership
the following month by 1967 a variety of
ex Great Western locos and rolling stock
had been bought for use by the society
including Hall Manor and 61 xx class
locos and an auto coach for use with one
four six six all of which was stored at
various locations in the South of
England but with British Railways
closing hundreds of miles of railway
line some of these locations would no
longer be available for storage so the
decision was made to move all of the
locos and stock to Didcot which had a
selection of buildings including coal
and watering facilities and a full road
engine shed number six 106 became the
first loco to take up residence at
Didcot on November the 4th 1967 with all
the stored stock in devon including one
four six six following on December the
second with British Railways use of the
Didcot sites not ceasing until 1970 the
society were initially restricted to the
use of shed Road number four to store
their stock the society organized their
first members open Day in May 1969
seeing nearly a thousand visitors
turning up for a ride behind one four
six six with six 106 also in steam this
experience led to the first public open
day in September of the same year with
an estimated three and a half thousand
visitors attending the event which again
saw the same two engines in steam along
with Industrial saddle tank
Prince Charlie after BR vacated the
Didcot site the GWS was able to develop
the full eight and a half acres as they
wished and over the years the Society
has laid two running lines the main line
runs alongside the eastern perimeter of
the site starting from a platform here
just next to the entrance to another at
the Oxford end of the site suitably
named Oxford Road
this line also features a set of
lineside mailbag apparatus which allows
for mail bag exchange demonstrations to
take place
the other line known as the branch line
runs along the western perimeter of the
site for half the distance of the main
line starting from here at Didcot Holt
it runs to a broad gauge transfer shed
adjacent to the Oxford Road platform the
transfer shed was built in the 1860s and
was used to transfer goods between
standard-gauge on the left and
broad-gauge on the right it currently
houses the broad gauge replica loco
Firefly which can be seen in action
along the broad gauge demo line at
various times throughout the year the
branch line also has 2 signal boxes one
from from' north installed in 1984 and
situated next to the transfer shed the
other from rad stock West was installed
in 1975 next to the Didcot Hall platform
and also controls the fully operational
level crossing adjacent to the box
other additions to the site were a six
road carriage shed complete with
workshop and restoration facilities to
house the Society's collection of
coaching stock access - which is gained
by an extra Midland Railway traverse'
from Derby a 70-foot turntable from
Southampton docks was installed in 1977
to replace the original 65-foot one that
had been removed some years previously
visitors to the site are also able to
visit the museum opened in 1982 it
houses an ever-changing display of items
ranging from model railways to old
ticket machines that can be seen
throughout the year a more recent
addition to the centre is the science
learning and railways exhibition this
aims to teach children about certain
aspects of Railways like how different
signalling codes are used for different
trains and which mode of transport is
the most environmental the locomotive
collection at Didcot has steadily grown
since the society moved in back in 1967
with around 30 steam and diesel locos in
various states of repair either on
display in the shed or in the workshops
ranging from the small one that started
it all to the big latest addition to the
King Fleet looking at how the sighted
Didcot has been developed over the years
you could be mistaken for thinking that
its future is safe
however it's currently uncertain be seen
with the current lease on the land due
to expire in 2019 an appeal has been set
out to secure a new 50 year lease which
will guarantee the use of the site for
the foreseeable future
it also means it'll be easier to plan
future developments to the site which
has recently become difficult to do due
to the relatively poor amount of time
left on the current lease
so while 2011 marks the end of a
restoration project that lasted for
nearly 20 years it also marks the
beginning of an important time in the
history of the Great Western society and
Didcot railway Center
you